the renaissance we're talking about the
period of european history mainly taking
place in italy from the 14th to the 16th
century bridging the gap between the
middle ages and modern day civilization
the word renaissance means rebirth in
this case the rebirth of the classical
greek and roman arts and philosophy
following the middle ages an era often
branded as a time of war cultural
decline and pandemics such as the black
death
humanism was really at the heart of the
renaissance a philosophy inspired by
classical greek and roman texts
celebrating human creativity individual
achievement in different fields and
promoting the idea that man was the
center of his own universe not god this
new mindset contrasted with medieval
philosophy which centered on the divine
and on following the rules set forth by
the catholic church as god's plan
the renaissance started in florence
italy which became very wealthy thanks
to trade with the ottoman empire the
biggest economic power in the region
fewer theories accounting for the
origins of the renaissance include the
reintroduction of classical texts to
italy through the immigration of
scholars following the fall of
constantinople and through returning
crusaders who had encountered advanced
muslim civilizations that had kept
copies and translations also members of
the powerful and wealthy medici family
of florence were famous backers of the
movement and supported public art for
recognition for the love of beauty and
also to legitimize their wealth the
movement later expanded to other italian
city-states such as venice milan rome
and then throughout western and northern
europe by scholars such as dutch
philosopher erasmus
thanks to the development of printing by
guttenberg and europe little known texts
from early humanist authors such as
petrarch were distributed to the masses
as literature rose as an important
aspect of everyday life
dante's divine comedy machiavelli's
prince and shakespeare's hamlet were
some of the most notable pieces of
literature of the renaissance
perhaps the most prominent feature of
the renaissance was the furthering of
the arts
the apex of artistic talent came later
during the high renaissance in the form
of leonardo da vinci raphael and
michelangelo who were supported by the
medeshi family
their paintings and sculptures featured
an atomically accurate human bodies in
complex poses dramatic and emotional
compositions naturalistic depictions of
space and intellectually sophisticated
subject matter notable examples include
the mona lisa the last supper the statue
of david the birth of venus and the
creation of adam the most prevalent
societal change during the renaissance
was the fall of feudalism and the rise
of a capitalist market economy increased
trade and the labor shortage caused by
the black death gave rise to something
of a middle class as workers started
demanding wages and better living
conditions
the development of the middle class and
the rise of humanism encouraged
europeans to question the role of the
catholic church and caused its influence
to wane in such context a german monk
named martin luther challenged many of
the practices of the church like
nepotism and the selling of indulgences
and led the protestant reformation a
revolutionary movement that caused the
split in the catholic church
to break ottoman dominance over access
to india and the far east europeans were
eager to explore new trade routes for
gold and spices in the age of
exploration columbus discovered the
americas in 1492 and magellan became the
first person to successfully
circumnavigate the globe in the early
1500s
placing the sun at the center of the
solar system rather than the earth was a
major breakthrough in the history of
science by polish astronomer copernicus
though his book was banned by the
catholic church
galileo galilei later also found
evidence for a heliocentric solar system
in addition to improving the telescope
and conducting experiments that paved
the way for newton's discoveries about
gravity
by the early 17th century the
renaissance movement had died out for
different reasons including the invasion
of italian territories by neighboring
powers and the catholic church
censorship of artists and writers in
response to the protestant reformation
as well as the establishment of the
inquisition which made any views that
challenged the church an act of heresy
punishable by death
many historians prefer to think of the
renaissance as an arts and cultural
movement rather than a historical period
that is distinct from the middle ages
since there are no clear dividing lines
between the two periods also most
historians claim the renaissance was
only experienced by the very rich
whereas for the vast majority of
europeans who were peasants it was not
really a thing the reason we studied the
renaissance so much is not because it
was so central to the 15th century but
because it matters to us now because of
the legacy of humanism and individualism
that strongly influenced the
euro-american world ever since
[Music]